So what do storm trips taste like like road salt and emergency candles?
No it's actually just like barbecue, salt and vinegar, dill pickle and ketchup.
So like a deconstructed all dressed.
I guess that would be a fancy way of saying it, yes.
OK so aside from the myriad of flavours, there are a number of other famous Canadian snacks. And today Leah, we're going to look at some of Canada's favorite snacks and learn where they come from.
I'm going to feel gross after this, aren't I?
Oh you will, but it will be.
Alright, If you say so.
OK, first up, the cocktail course.
I don't think that's an actual course, but.
It is today.
OK. Well what do you have? Ontario ice wine? A high alcohol percentage Canadian beer? Maybe some Newfoundland screech?
Leah, it's 4:00 in the afternoon, we can't be drinking screech.
Oh is that not a thing. Oh yeah right. That's ridiculous to do that at 4:00 in the afternoon. I've never done that.
OK and while those, those boozes are all really good examples of Canadian drinks, I thought today we would go with the quintessentially Canadian cocktail, the Caesar.
OK that I can do.
OK just wait right here, I'm going to go make you one.
OK.
OK.
Cheers.
Cheers. OK don't drop it.
This is dangerous to do.
Dangerous. Cheers for everyone. It's hard to clean these glasses actually. There we go.
Oh that's a spicy caesar man.
Is it spicy? Did I make it too spicy?
That's, it feels like I'm only drinking hot sauce right now. I'm going to have some celery to just wash it down. Okay. Yeah.
Well that's why it's so good cause it's like a meal.
This is going to be an inappropriate end to an episode because there was a lot of alcohol in this. I can already feel it.
Not a lot.
OK so tell me about the Caesar.
Aright. So the classic Caesar, which is what we're having here today is made by using lemon or lime and brimming the glass with celery salt. You then put in some ice, pour in the vodka, clam juice aka Clamato, and throw in a celery stick and a wedge of citrus.
And while clam juice can sound kind of gross, it's pretty good. So who was it who had the idea to put vodka and clams together?
Well this national treasure has somewhat murky origins. What I found is that in 1969, Calgary restaurant manager Walter Chell, was tasked with creating a new cocktail to celebrate the opening of a restaurant in Calgary at the Calgary Inn. Walter drew inspiration from a popular Italian dish, a dish with a tomato clam sauce. But premade Clamato juice was sold in the U.S. as early as 1961 and so there are other reports that a another Clamato-based vodka drink predates Chell's creation.
So wait, it's not Canadian?
Again, it's a bit murky. But what I think makes this drink Canadian is the distinct popularity it has in Canada. The country has really embraced the drink. It's been called the national cocktail and even has its own day. May 18th is national Caesar Day in Canada.
Finally, a celebration. I can get behind.
But the Caesar has become really intense in some bars.
In some bars? It's intense right here. It's like burning a hole down my esophagus.
I'm sorry.
My God, it's so hot.
Do you want more Clamato?
No, no, let's just keep going.
This doesn't bode well for the rest of the courses.
Once we're in the fort, we can't leave the fort.
Okay! But the Caesar has become really intense in some bars. It can become like a full meal. There's even one restaurant in Vancouver that serves a Caesar with the following garnishes: roasted chicken, a burger, onion rings, chicken wings, a pulled pork, mac and cheese, hot dog and a brownie for dessert. And it all comes stacked on the cup.
No. That sounds disgusting. I mean it definitely should come with a Tums chaser, I'm hoping or.
Okay, well now that you have your very spicy drink, I can offer you our second course, the appetizer course.
Ooh, I know what that is, slamming into the fork. Here we go.
Slamming into the fork. Alright here you go.
Oh yeah. Love it.
It's not bad.
It's so good. So it's bannock.
It's bannock! Okay, so bannock is a traditional style bread that many Indigenous people have variations of both in the U.S. and in Canada. It's called bannock, scone or fry bread.
So how are they different? And by the way it's scone.
It's not scone. It's not scone. Do not even.
Scone?
You go to a reserve and you say scone. You watch what happens.
What they just go, actually it's scone.
No, no. Are you kidding me?
They're going to physically hurt me?
No they'll just laugh at you a lot and trust me.
That's fine. You sounded more ominous. It was like if you come on to a reserve and you say it's scone.
You mean scone?
Right and now I'm confused. Anyway doesn't matter. You're not pronouncing it correctly. Continue.
No I'm, oh Jesus. Drink your drink. Okay so mainly the difference between bannock, a scone or fry bread is the preparation. Bannock is sometimes called scone when it's made on top of the stove or in the oven and fry bread is fried in oil on top the stove.
Okay that makes sense.
Yeah. So, but the bannock ingredients are basically the same. It's usually some combination of flour, water, milk, lard or butter, baking powder and salt. Sometimes there are variations on this and you can add raisins or berries or whatever you want. It can be savory or sweet. It's incredibly versatile.
So where does it come from? Where are the origins of this food?
Well there are some reports of Indigenous people on the west coast making something similar with casma bulb, which is kind of like a sweet potato. The casma bulb would be earth roasted for a long period of time and then dried and formed into cakes. Some people think that this is where the origins for bannock may come from. When the country was being formed the government really wanted Indigenous people to move and stay on reserves and so this was a way to make way for settlers and the development of the railroad as it moved from east to west. Food rations were used as a kind of incentive by the government to move people onto reserves and sort of get out of Canada's way.
And this is when the buffalo on the prairies were being massacred at an exorbitant rate.
 Exactly. Traditional ways of eating were being compromised more and more and so Indigenous people needed those government rations. People were literally starving. So the government said come to the res get your flour and make your cheap food with it, make bannock. And the word bannock actually comes from the Scottish word bannock and that's why we say scone.
So it's a really actually kind of astonishing and depressing origin for such a great tasty food.
This is true. Alright. Up next, the main course.
Wait, wait, wait, I have a contribution to this if we're going to do Canadian food.
OK.
And I know I said we can't leave the blanket fort, but I got to go to the kitchen for this one.
[Music and preparation]
OK. Here it is.
What is that?
A pizza pop. When I was in high school I lived on these. OK. Here's one.
OK. Oh myy God.
Folded over the plate there.
Eww.
Oh my God.
What is that?
I can't believe I ate those like consistently as I did.
Why did I take such a big bite?
I took away too big of a bite and I got like a meat thing in there.
I got a pepper I think.
Oh yeah.
They technically are a Canadian invention.
That's right.
So they're allowed to be here.
So in 1964, a Winnipeg resident Paul Faraci invented the pizza pop, a miniature calzone. Faraci made the pops in a restaurant in Winnipeg, sold them there and then took them to local fairs and festivals.
So I can only think that they were way better than what we're eating here, the originals.
It's weird. You know when they say like you can never go back, they aint joking because that stuff used to be so good growing up and now it tastes like.
It's like if they made baby food like pizza baby food.
 So they became pretty popular and in 1987, Faraci sold the pizza pop business to Pillsbury. Pizza pops are still being made in Winnipeg and are only available in Canada.
You know a lot about these pizza pops.
I mean I used to buy these at the corner store where they would microwave them in their plastic wrapping and fun fact, I grew an extra toe.
We've now had our cocktail. course, our appetizer course, a surprise course. Shall we move on to the main that I have selected for us to try?
Oh I'm goingtTo get diarrhea, aren't I?
Hey, you're the one who brought the surprise course.
OK.
Me too. Damn it Leah, this is for education and you're going to like this one. Are you ready for poutine?
Yes. Okay yes. That is some good food.
I actually ate a lot of this when I was in high school, but like a crappy home version.
Oh man, pizza pockets and poutine. How are we still alive?
I have no idea. OK, but back to protein. So in its simplest form, poutine consists of fries, gravy and cheese curds. But just like any other great food, it has some serious rules around proper ingredients. Some say the fries need to be double fried. Others say a lighter type of gravy is necessary, chicken, veal or turkey gravy for instance. What we all can agree upon is that curds is a must. If you don't have curds you aren't having poutine.
Yeah, I love it.
It's pretty good. I know.
I mean fries and gravy with a little bit of cheese, who can argue with that?
I know. I can't argue with fries. I can't argue with gravy.
No.
And I'm definitely not going to argue putting cheese on top.
No, it's amazing.
So in the U.S. there are some places that have something called disco fries, which are similar to poutine, but not poutine. The difference being that the curds are replaced with mozzarella cheese. They're called the disco fries because in the 70s and 80s people in New Jersey and New York who were on their way home from a disco would order them, hence disco fries.
So disco fries are like the tacky Jersey cousin of poutine.
Well the roots of poutine here in Canada aren't super glamorous. So let's not get ahead of ourselves. And there are a few different origin stories for the food. One story has the greasy snack being invented in 1957 in Warwick, Quebec by Fernand Lachance of Cafe Ideal. Fernand says that at the request of a patron, he added curds to an order of fries. It is said that when the order was placed Lachance exclaimed.
"Ca va faire une maudite poutine!"
Which translates to.
"That will make a damned mess!"
Gravy was a later addition, I guess to make more of a mess, but also to keep the fries warm. Another story puts the origin of poutine occurring in Drummondville, Quebec where in 1958, the restaurant Le Roy Jucep was serving something called patate-sauce, which I think is just fries and gravy. And by 1964 the owner of the restaurant noticed customers were adding cheese curds to the patate-sauce and so he added fromage-patate-sauce to his menu.
So fries, gravy and cheese.
That's my understanding, but my French is pretty bad. I did read that the word for the food poutine could have originated from the English word for "pudding" or "pouding" as it would be in French, which would mean messy food. And in Quebec poutine can be slang for a mess.
Well looking at what we have left on this plate and in the blanket fort, I would say that's pretty apt.
Some also say that the word may come from pate or poutite, which is a potato ragout.
So even if we don't know the specifics, what we do know is that poutine was a Quebec invention.
Yeah and more than that, we know that it was a rural Quebec invention. One thing I did read about was that although the specific place where poutine was invented is a bit difficult to pin down, what we do know is that poutine was being eaten and made in rural Quebec near for fromagerries where people were making cheese curds.
It's so much history for a food that is commonly referred to as drunk food.
I know well Leah, that wraps up our main course. Shall we move on to our final course? Dessert.
Okay, before I have a heart attack or so soil myself. Exactly. It's wonderful. Let's do this.
So dessert, Leah. Canada has a lot of desserts. Like way too many, like seriously Leah.
Well I consider that a national strength.
I do have to say like there were a million to choose from from the Canadian canon, from the beaver tail to tger tail ice cream. There were two desserts that came up over and over when I was researching: the Nanaimo bar and the butter tart. And so today, for our fifth and final of course, we will have butter tarts. And let me tell yo,u there is some serious Canadian passion around the butter tart.
OK. Well I feel like that is really clear in this episode. People have some serious feelings about their food in Canada.
Alright. Are you ready?
Yes.
And ta-da, here is your fifth and final course, dessert, Leah.
OK. I just have to confess something. I was really excited when you said Nanaimo bar and then my heart sank when you said butter tart because I love Nanaimo bars and I really don't really like butter tarts. And this one I can tell that you bought at the corner store for like 50 cents. You did, didn't you? This isn't real.
Okay. I'm not much of a baker.
I'm still going ot try it.
But I mean you can tell it's a.
Okay, I'm taking a bite.
I think it pairs very well with the Caesar.
It's like making my heart race. There's so much sugar in there.
OK hold on, I'm going to try it.
I have had people's homemade butter tarts and they are really beautiful, but I find most are you know store bought. There not good.
When I was doing the research, like it was Nanaimo bar, butter tart and butter tart is the thing that I could get my hands on today. I asked some Canadians what they thought about the butter tart.
I don't like them. I know they're Canadian, but they're very sugary. They often have raisins and I don't like raisins, but even without the raisins they're just a gooey texture without a lot of taste and just very sugary.
 Butter tarts are delicious. I have not had one in a very very long time, but I grew up on store bought grocery store, A&P butter tarts because my dad loved them.
 The first half of the butter tart that I eat, like I really enjoy that first half, but then I can't. It's just too much sugar for the second half. So it's good to have a butter tart friend.
 I love them. My mom has always made them, like they're like a holiday tradition. So I've always, I've always had them, I've always have them in my life. And now that I'm older, my mom does all her Christmas like holiday baking prior to me getting there. And so when I arrive, my mom takes them out of the freezer, takes a butter tart out of the freezer, has theem all and once thaw we have them. They're like super treat.
When I was researching about butter tarts, what a fun month for me. So many people were adamant about butter tarts and what goes in, the filling, raisins or no raisins, nuts or no nuts. Even the firmness of the filling being a point of contention. Some people even put bacon in them.
Ugh, but I'm not surprised.
Yeah we were basically living in the age of bacon. So the classic butter tart according to Chatelaine magazine consists of a mini pie crust, like a tart, filled with brown sugar, corn syrup, maple syrup, eggs, butter, vanilla, vinegar and salt. And when I looked into the history of the butter tart, I saw just how far back its story stretches. Although the first published recipe has been traced to 1900, in the Royal Victoria cookbook, there is evidence that the origins may go back as far as 1663. This was when France sent women over to Quebec to help colonize the "New World.".
Oh no.
Oh yes approximately 800 French women, who were called the Filles du Roi, were or the King's Daughters, they were sent over to help with the gender imbalance in the colonies.
So there were no women. So that means all the men were just kind of.
Maybe eating a different kind of butter tart?
Ok, but what these women brought with them was probably the basis of what we now know as butter tarts.
Well that's quite a history lesson.
it really is. With the conclusion of dessert that brings us to the end of our five course culinary tour.
Thank you.
Oh you're welcome. And those are just some of the Canadian greats. There are so many more snacks we didn't get to and I just want to say Kraft Dinner. Thank you. You've saved me when I've been really broke.
Yes, yes.
Yes. Sorry tourtiere,. I do love you. Sorry lobster Rolls. I think I love you the most.
Yeah. Yup.
I'm sorry Halifax donairs.
I'm not.
With your sweet sweet sauce. I love you.
It's not good, I'm sorry.
It's so good.
I just want to take a moment here and say to all the maple syrup I've eaten in my life, I love you and God Bless.
That Caesar was strong.
I think the biggest takeaway I found from this episode was that you know Canada really struggles with its identity, who it is and I think when we get known for something Canadian, we want it to be super Canadian. We hold on to it really tight. We can become a bit obsessive about the way that it should be consumed or enjoyed. It's like when something gets called Canadian, people can't help, but put another Canadian food on top of it. Caesar? Put a lobster roll in it. Poutine? Put some lobster on that. Alpha-Getti, put some lobster in that Alpha-Getti.
I mean actually that would really ruin the lobster, so don't do that.
Thank you for coming on this culinary tour Leah and.
Thank you for having me.
Yeah no problem I hope I didn't make you feel too sick.
Disgusting? Yeah I totally feel disgusting and I'm going to spend the night just maybe with a glass of Alka-Seltzer and some draw string pants.
You can cook next time.
That I can just keep open for the rest. Thanks Falen.
I'm getting out of the blanket fort now.
The Secret Life of Canada is recorded in Toronto on the traditional lands of the Haudenosaunee, Wendat, and most recently the Mississaugas of the new credit.
It's hosted by Leah-Simone Bowen.
And me, Falen Johnson.
And produced by Katie Jensen.
Nathan Burley wrote and performed our theme song.
Follow us on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter @SecretLifeCAD. If there's a story you would like to see in an episode or a piece of history you would like to tell us about, please e-mail us at secretlifeofcanada@gmail.com.
Thanks for exploring Canada's hidden history with us and remember pass it on.